

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  summer  2013,  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the  United  States  (US)  met  for  the  first  
round  of  negotiations  on  a  Transatlantic  Trade  and  Investment  Partnership  (TTIP).  The  
signature of the treaty is planned for early 2015.  
 
In  reaction  to  the  strong  public  interest  in  the  TTIP  negotiations,  the  European  
Commission invited all stakeholders to respond to a public consultation on modalities for 
investment  protection  and  ISDS  in  TTIP.  This  includes  consideration  of  improving  the  
transparency of the ISDS system.
1
 
 
The TTIP will serve as a model for future EU trade agreements with other third parties. 
The   current   discussions   on   the   TTIP,   and   the   themes   raised   in   the   Commission   
consultation,  relate  very  much  to  issues  of  public  services,  procurement,  state  aid  and  
investment protection. These clearly represent areas of local interest, as TTIP provisions 
impacting on these issues will affect local governments on both sides of the Atlantic.   
 
As  the  network  of  Europe’s  major  cities,  we  welcome  the  Commission’s  approach  to 
improving  transparency  and  to  opening  up  discussion  to  public  consultation.  This  
statement  is  a  contribution  to  that  debate  and  with  it  an  open  offer  to  provide  further  
expert  advice  on  issues  of  local  relevance.  The  comments  made  in  this  paper  are  also 
relevant for other multi-lateral agreements, in particular current negotiations regarding 
the ‘Trade in Services Agreement’ (TiSA). 
 
Potential benefits of the TTIP 
As  cities  we  see  that  TTIP  has  potential  benefits  although  the  extent  and  magnitude  of  
such gains are contested. These possible benefits include: 
•  increased foreign trade and economic growth 
•  enhanced competitiveness in a changing world market place 
•  strengthened innovation potential 
•  creation of new jobs 
• - new opportunities for small and large companies 
•  global standards in industry and services 
•  strengthened transatlantic values 
 
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
 
1
Consultation notice: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2014/march/tradoc_152279.pdf 
EUROCITIES statement on the 
Transatlantic Trade and 
Investment Partnership 
 
  
  

 
 
October  2014 | www.eurocities.eu | EUROCITIES statement on TTIP 2 
We  expect  the  content  of  the  final  agreement  will  support  the  achievement  of  these  
targets. 
 
Maintaining European standards  
It  is  important  that  the  TTIP  does  not  lead  to  a  weakening  of  the  standards  that  are  
already established in the EU. We place a high value on the quality of our public services 
and  it  is  essential  that  the  TTIP  ensures  that  we  can  protect  our  social,  public  health,  
consumer safety and environment standards.  
 
In particular, we would draw attention to the need to maintain existing EU and member 
state standards on: 
 
• public services and local self-administration 
• procurement laws 
• social and labour protection 
• the environment 
• consumer and data protection rights 
• health protection 
• culture and education 
• food and product safety 
 
Provision of quality public services 
The freedom of local governments to provide, organise and finance local public services 
must  not  be  restricted  through  the  TTIP.  We  see  a  risk  of  loss  of  freedom  to  make  
regulatory changes deemed necessary in case they affect international commitments. 
 
The  provisions  related  to  public  procurement  or  state  aid  should  remain  within  the  
framework of what already applies to the EU internal market. The possibility to include 
environmental, social and fair trade criteria in public tenders should be maintained. 
 
In the context of public services, we expect that the final agreement will be in line with 
the  European  Council  mandate  for  the  TTIP  negotiations  and  will  preserve  the  high  
quality  of  the  EU's  public  utilities,  in  accordance  with  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  
the European Union and in particular Protocol No 26 on Services of General Interest. 
 
We  have  specific  concerns  with  regard  to  state  aid  for  culture  or  reduced  VAT  rates.  
Although  audio-visual  services  have  been  excluded  from  the  negotiating  mandate,  it  
remains unclear how other public cultural services will be affected.  
 
In the light of Article 4 (2) of the Treaty of the European Union, we strongly recommend 
a  ‘positive  list’  approach,  as  applied  in  the  General  Agreement  on  Trade  in  Services  
(GATS)  negotiations.  This  allows  each  EU  country  to  specify  the  kinds  of  services  it  will  

 
 
October  2014 | www.eurocities.eu | EUROCITIES statement on TTIP 3 
open  up  to  foreign  suppliers  which  means  that  only  public  services  that  are  specifically  
listed in the attachments are covered by the agreement.  
 
The Investor-state-dispute-settlement (ISDS) 
In principle we consider that there is no need to include ISDS clauses in the TTIP because 
national  courts  in  Europe  and  the  US  guarantee  a  sufficiently  high  standard  of  legal  
protection. This is all the more the case because we are concerned about the ISDS and its 
potential to impact on governmental processes.  
 
If companies gain the right to sue governments over alleged loss of profits, ie. damages 
caused  by  legislative  changes,  this  could  have  consequences  on  national  regulatory  
processes, the full implications of which are difficult to predict.  
 
In  our  view  it  would  be  undesirable  for  national,  regional  and  local  decision-making  on  
issues  of  legitimate  public  concern  to  be  influenced  disproportionately  by  consideration  
of the risks of potential future dispute settlements with investors.   
 
We appreciate the intention of the European Commission to review and improve current 
ISDS  rules  and  procedures  (as  conveyed  in  the  public  consultation  on  investment  
protection and investor-to-state dispute settlement in the TTIP). However this should be 
confined  to  a  general  context  since  ISDS  regulations  are  not  required  as  far  as  TTIP  is  
concerned.  On  this  issue  we  generally  think  that  member  states  courts  should  prevail  
over specific ISDS tribunals. 
 
Strengthening the process 
We  welcome  the  decision  by  the  European  Commission  to  improve  transparency,  in  
particular  through  public  consultations  and,  civil  society  and  stakeholders’  dialogue.  A  
lively  public  dialogue  would  ensure  the  institutions  approving  the  final  deal  (European  
Parliament, the Council and members states parliaments) will have access to a range of 
useful input.  
 
For this reason we would find regular update information extremely valuable and suggest 
that public consultations are extended to other areas of the TTIP, not only ISDS. 
 
We expect that the TTIP will be a comprehensive and ambitious agreement and as such it 
has  to  be  ratified  by  the  EU  member  states'  parliaments  after  it  has  been  approved  by  
the European Parliament and the Council. The procedure to amend the sectoral annexes 
should  not  be  different.  Our  national  parliaments  should  be  involved  in  the  ratification  
process.  We  would  therefore  not  be  in  favour  of  a  simplified  mechanism  (fast-track 
ratification to amend the sectoral annexes of the TTIP).  
 
We hope that the final TTIP agreement will take into account the concerns raised above. 